AGENT-DRAFT: GKO-2006 — mTLS Certificate Management and Validation [code+dev-draft] (#1326)
gravitee-io-labs/beta-docs: docs/gko/4.11/mtls-certificate-management-overview.md

# mTLS Certificate Management Overview

## Overview

> mTLS Certificate Management enables administrators to upload, validate, and rotate client certificates for application-level mutual TLS authentication. The feature supports PKCS7 certificate bundles, scheduled certificate activation, and grace-period rotation to prevent downtime. It is available in APIM 4.11 and above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mTLS Certificate Management enables administrators to upload, validate, and rotate client certificates for application-level mutual TLS authentication. The feature supports multiple client certificates, scheduled certificate activation, and grace-period rotation to prevent downtime. It is available in APIM 4.11 and above.
```

## Key Concepts

### Client Certificate Lifecycle

Client certificates progress through four states: **Scheduled** (not yet active), **Active** (currently valid), **Active with End Date** (valid until a specified date), and **Revoked** (no longer valid). Certificates include metadata such as subject, issuer, fingerprint (SHA-256), and expiration date. Each certificate is scoped to a single application and environment.

| Status | Description |
|:-------|:------------|
| `ACTIVE` | Certificate is currently valid with no end date |
| `ACTIVE_WITH_END` | Certificate is valid until a specified end date |
| `SCHEDULED` | Certificate will become active at a future date |
| `REVOKED` | Certificate has been revoked and is no longer valid |

### Certificate Rotation

Certificate rotation allows administrators to upload a new certificate while an existing certificate remains active during a grace period. Both certificates authenticate requests during the overlap, preventing downtime. The grace period end date must not be in the past or exceed the active certificate's expiration.

> ### PKCS7 Bundle Processing

Reviewer: Remove this section. PKCS7 are used internally to bundle certificate, that is a impl detail.

The platform accepts PKCS7/CMS-formatted certificate bundles containing multiple certificates. Bundles are parsed into individual certificates, each assigned a unique alias. Empty bundles are rejected unless explicitly allowed. Certificates are stored in PEM format.

### Certificate Validation

> Uploaded certificates are validated before storage. The platform extracts the subject, issuer, expiration date, and generates a SHA-256 fingerprint. Certificates with expiration dates in the past are rejected. The fingerprint is checked for uniqueness within the environment to prevent duplicate uploads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uploaded certificates are validated before storage. The platform extracts the subject, issuer, expiration date, and generates a SHA-256 fingerprint. The fingerprint is checked for uniqueness within the environment to prevent duplicate uploads. Certificate cannot be a CA cert, in case of PEM bundle only the first certificate of the chain is retained.
```

## Prerequisites

- APIM version 4.11 or above
- Application with mTLS plan configured

> - Valid X.509 certificate in PEM format (or PKCS7 bundle)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Valid X.509 certificate in PEM format
```
